# Research Paper: SSRN-5295002

*Extracted from PDF on 2025-07-10 13:27:07*

---



--- Page 1 ---

Factoring in the Low-Volatility Factor
∗
Amar Soebhag, Guido Baltussen and Pim van Vliet
June 2025
Abstract
Low-volatility stocks have historically delivered higher risk-adjusted returns than their
high-volatilitypeers. Despiteextensiveevidenceandwidespreadadoptionintheinvest-
ment industry, the so-called low-volatility factor is absent from standard asset pricing
models. This paradox is attributable to asymmetry in factor legs and real-life invest-
ment frictions. A low-volatility factor substantially improves performance of factor
models once accounting for these dimensions in various in-sample and out-of-sample
exercises, across different low-risk measures and across methodological choices. We
advocate integrating the low-volatility factor into asset pricing models, accounting for
the asymmetry and frictions.
Keywords: Asset pricing, model selection, low-volatility, low-beta, investment
frictions, factor asymmetry
JEL: G11, G12, G15
∗Amar Soebhag (corresponding author) is from Erasmus School of Economics and Robeco Quantitative
Investing, email: soebhag@ese.eur.nl. Guido Baltussen is from Erasmus School of Economics and Northern
Trust Asset Management - Quantitative Strategies, email: baltussen@ese.eur.nl. Pim van Vliet is from
Robeco Quantitative Investing, email: p.van.vliet@robeco.nl. Financial support by Tinbergen Institute and
Erasmus Research Institute of Management is gratefully acknowledged. We thank David Blitz, Amit Goyal,
Matthias Hanauer and Bart van Vliet for feedback and comments. The views expressed in this paper are
not necessarily shared by Robeco Institutional Asset Management nor Northern Trust Asset Management.

--- Page 2 ---

1 Introduction
Low-risk stocks, commonly identified by low volatility or beta, systematically provide higher
risk-adjusted returns than high-risk stocks (see, e.g., Black, Jensen, and Scholes, 1972; Hau-
gen and Heins, 1975 for early evidence). A large stream of subsequent work confirms the
presence of this low-risk effect, henceforth low-volatility effect, across sample periods, mar-
kets, and risk measures.1 The low-volatility effect tends to be one of the strongest and
most robust effects across hundreds of anomalies that are part of the factor zoo (Jensen,
Kelly, and Pedersen, 2023), with several studies providing evidence for economic channels
of the low-volatility effect.2 Academic interest in low-volatility investing has helped cat-
alyze a sizable industry dedicated to exploiting this anomaly.3 Moreover, leading equity risk
model providers (such as MSCI, Axioma, Factset, Bloomberg and Style Analytics) include
low-volatility as a distinct factor.
Despite the strong academic evidence and popularity in the industry, we observe a para-
dox: the low-volatility factor is not included in well-known asset pricing models.4 In this
1The low-volatility effect holds for different risk measures, such as market beta (Frazzini and Pedersen,
2014), volatility (Blitz, 2007), and idiosyncratic volatility (Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang, 2009), is present
withinandacrossindustriesandcountries(Baker,Bradley,andTaliaferro,2014),holdsamongthelargestand
mostliquidU.S.stocks(AuerandSchuhmacher,2015). Italsoholdsaftercontrollingforotherfactorpremia,
is robust over time (e.g., Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang, 2009; Blitz, 2007; Frazzini and Pedersen, 2014;
Blitz, 2020; Baker and Haugen, 2012), is present in corporate bonds (Houweling and Van Zundert, 2017),
government bonds, commodities, currencies and equity markets (Frazzini and Pedersen, 2014; Baltussen,
Swinkels, and Van Vliet, 2021). Baltussen, van Vliet, and Van Vliet (2023) even confirm the low-volatility
effect out-of-sample over the 61 years before 1926, the inception date of the CRSP sample.
2Theseincludeleverageconstraints(FrazziniandPedersen,2014), skewnesspreference(Bali, Cakici, and
Whitelaw, 2011), co-skewness risk (Schneider, Wagner, and Zechner, 2020), arbitrage asymmetry (Stam-
baugh, Yu, and Yuan, 2015), agency issues (Baker, Bradley, and Wurgler, 2011), and institutional investors
shifting their demand from high- to low-risk stocks as volatility increases (Barroso, Detzel, and Maio, 2025).
3In fact, in the industry the low-volatility effect is one of the most exploited factors, with the largest
asset managers and most quantitative managers recognizing and investing based on the low-volatility effect.
As of May 2025 assets under management in low volatility investment solutions have surged to over $392
billion, with data from ETFdb showing 110$ billion invested in low-volatility ETFs, while investment fund
and mandate data from eVestment reveals assets under management in other strategy vehicles that utilize
volatility as factor to equate $283 billion.
4Seminal studies to factor models that price the cross-section of stock returns do not consider the low-
volatility factor. Factors in these models include size and book-to-market (Fama and French, 1993, 2015;
Barillas and Shanken, 2018), profitability and investments (Fama and French, 2015), return on equity and
asset growth (Hou and Zhang, 2015; Barillas and Shanken, 2018), equity issuance and post-earnings an-
nouncement drift (Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Sun, 2020), or momentum (Barillas and Shanken, 2018).
1

--- Page 3 ---

paper we examine this paradox and find that the low-volatility effect should be factored into
factor models.
To better understand this paradox, we start by acknowledging that prior studies typically
define the investment opportunity set by building on two important assumptions: (i) the
long and short legs that constitute factor mimicking portfolios are considered equal, and
(ii) investment frictions such as investability, transaction costs, or shorting costs, are absent.
Although commonly unaddressed in the literature, the long and short legs of factor portfolios
are composed of distinct stocks with different return drivers or risk exposures (Fama and
French, 2018; Blitz, Baltussen, and van Vliet, 2020), limits to arbitrage (Stambaugh, Yu, and
Yuan, 2012, 2015), and investment frictions (Blitz, Baltussen, and van Vliet, 2020). Factor
returns tend to be lower and correlations higher for short legs of canonical factors (Fama
and French, 2018; Blitz, Baltussen, and van Vliet, 2020), short sellers face greater limits
to arbitrage than long buyers (Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan, 2015), creating an “arbitrage
asymmetry” between overpriced and underpriced stocks, and shorting stocks involves sizable
frictions on investability. Consequently, long and shorts of factors may have different asset
pricing implications, creating a potential factor pricing asymmetry.
Further, Detzel, Novy-Marx, and Velikov (2023) (henceforth DNV) highlight serious is-
sues associated with ignoring real-world concerns in financial research, as investment fric-
tions such as transaction costs significantly impact the realized performance of investors. An
approach focused on gross returns favors factors that maximize model performance irrespec-
tive of their transaction costs potentially leading to misleading inferences. DNV show that
accounting for transaction costs fundamentally alters the outcome when evaluating asset
pricing models.
Westartouranalysesbyconstructingfactorreturnsfromwell-knownassetpricingmodels
using U.S. common stocks from the CRSP database between January 1972 and December
2023. We build upon the standard factor testing framework which we expand by embedding
investability considerations, such as the low accessibility of micro-caps and impact of data
2

--- Page 4 ---

missingness.5 Subsequently,wecomparefactormodelsbyusingthemaximumSharperatioas
the primary criterion to assess a model’s asset pricing power, following Barillas and Shanken
(2017). If the tangency portfolio of a model’s factors is mean-variance efficient, adding
more factors does not increase the maximum Sharpe ratio. Hence, asset pricing models can
be selected using this criterion. We consider the major factor pricing models examined in
the literature: the models of Fama and French (1993, 2015, 2018); Hou and Zhang (2015);
Barillas and Shanken (2018); Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Sun (2020).
In our baseline specification, we focus on long-short factors without considering transac-
tion and shorting costs. Our findings are in line with the design of existing factor models:
augmenting standard factor models with a low-volatility factor raises the maximum Sharpe
ratio across various factor models by a mere 0.57%. Hence, the low-volatility adds no signif-
icant residual pricing power in a frictionless framework. Although the low-volatility factor
has high average returns it tends to be subsumed by factors like profitability and invest-
ment factors, in line with Novy-Marx (2014) and Fama and French (2016). This result may
partially explain why the low-volatility factor is excluded from well-known factor models.
Next, we depart from the standard long-short framework and recognize the asymmetry
between long and short legs of factors. To account for factor asymmetry, we decompose
long–short factor portfolios into their two market-hedged legs. For the long leg, we neutralize
its market exposure by taking an offsetting short position in the market factor; for the short
leg, we hold the short portfolio and offset its market beta with a long position in the market
factor. By construction, the sum of these two hedged legs reproduces the original long–short
return. For each factor model, we maintain the same set of factor portfolios as in the baseline
analyses, but we allow the long and short legs to enter as separate factors to allow for their
5Several studies argue that equity anomalies are influenced by micro-caps (Fama and French, 2008; Hou
and Zhang, 2020), which are typically inaccessible for most investors, since they have limited capacity and
are expensive to trade. In addition, a commonly ignored aspect in empirical asset pricing research is data
missingness. Evaluatingfactormodelsrequiresdataavailabilityonallfactormetricsperstockoranexplicit
approach for dealing with missing data. For example, Bryzgalova, Lerner, Lettau, and Pelger (2024) show
thatmissingdataisprevalentinCompustatfundamentalsdata,especiallywhenconsideringmultiplemetrics,
and importantly, missing data is not random with stock returns depending on missingness.
3

--- Page 5 ---

different asset pricing implications.
This decomposition reveals that hedged long legs on average generate higher average
returns than hedged short legs. When comparing “long-plus-short” factor models, where
each hedged leg receives its own weight, we observe higher maximum Sharpe ratios rela-
tive to the “long-short” approach. Moreover, factor models improve by a substantial 11.9%
when including hedged low and high volatility factor legs, with the hedged low-volatility
leg commanding an average weight of 26.2%. In spanning regressions, all factor models
show significant improvements at the 1% significance level when factoring in low-volatility.
This decomposition offers a novel perspective on prior claims that the low-volatility pre-
mium is subsumed by profitability and investment factors (Novy-Marx, 2014; Fama and
French, 2016). We find that the apparent subsumption arises due to the short side of the
low-volatility factor: high-volatility stocks exhibit strong correlations with low profitability
and high investment stocks, and thus add no incremental pricing power once those factors
enterthemodel. Incontrast, thehedgedlongsideoflow-volatilitycontainsdistincteconomic
information and advances the performance of factor models.
In our third specification, we embed transaction and shorting costs in factor composition
and returns. Prior studies typically ignore these costs, favoring models with factors con-
structed to maximize gross returns. We compute factor portfolio returns - considering both
legs - net of these costs using the bid-ask spread estimator of Hasbrouck (2009) and shorting
fee measures. We show that accounting for costs changes factor performances substantially
as different factors are impacted by investment frictions to varying extents, consistent with
DNV. To illustrate, the PEAD factor has an average long-short return of 3.45% per annum,
but earns -0.87% per annum after accounting for costs. Interestingly, the performance of the
low-volatility factor remains robust, especially on the hedged long-side with average gross
(3.18%) and net (2.70%) returns per annum, respectively. While the inference across factor
models is impacted by cost considerations, the low-volatility factor consistently improves
all factor models by an average of 13.0%. In spanning regressions, all factor models show
4

--- Page 6 ---

significant improvements when factoring in low-volatility. In addition, short legs - includ-
ing the high-volatility leg - receive little to no weight in mean-variance efficient portfolios,
whereasthelow-volatilitylegreceives26.4%weight, onaverage. Thebestperformingmodels
are the augmented Fama-French model (Fama and French, 2015) with cash-based operat-
ing profitability and momentum, or the model shown by Barillas and Shanken (2018), both
including the low-volatility factor. In other words, accounting for factor asymmetry factors
in the low-volatility factor into asset pricing models, especially when accounting for real-life
investment frictions.
Finally, we only consider long legs in our analysis to account for the practical frictions
associated with implementing the short leg of factor strategies. Beyond shorting costs, in-
vestors face additional operational constraints. Some stocks may be difficult or impossible
to short due to limited availability or the risk of recall. Moreover, legal barriers can further
restrict short-selling, including (partial) bans. Institutional mandates may exclude short
selling; many mutual funds and pension funds are prohibited by charter from engaging in
short sales for speculative purposes. Given these considerations, we argue that analyzing the
long leg of factors separately is useful for understanding factor models in practice. Interest-
ingly, we find that dropping short legs from factor models yields largely similar models and
maximum Sharpe ratios as models that consider short legs. In addition, all factor models
significantly improve with the addition of the long low-volatility factor, and the best per-
forming models remain the augmented Fama-French model and the model shown by Barillas
and Shanken (2018) including the low-volatility factor while having similar factor weights
and Sharpe ratios as in previous tests.
So far, our results are centered around the maximum Sharpe ratio criterion, inspired by
Barillas and Shanken (2018), estimated in-sample. However, Fama and French (2018) argue
that this metric can be upward biased, especially for models with more factors and smaller
time dimensions. To address this concern, we complement our in-sample results with out-
of-sample tests using ex-ante recursive mean-variance efficient portfolios or a bootstrapped-
5

--- Page 7 ---

based model comparison exercise where we compute the probability that a factor model
outperforms all other factor models. We find that our results hold up across these tests.
The low-volatility factor improves all factor models significantly and is factored into factor
models across the majority of simulation runs when accounting for factor asymmetry and
real-life investment frictions.
Next, we consider several robustness tests. We examine results over extended samples
starting in January 1930 or July 1963 for the factors that can be constructed across those
periods. We find that the low-volatility factor provides added value in these deeper samples
once accounting for factor asymmetry and investment frictions. Furthermore, we examine
seven variations of the low-volatility variable, including market beta (Frazzini and Pedersen,
2014), idiosyncratic volatility (Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang, 2006), or leveraging the low-
volatility legs (as in Frazzini and Pedersen, 2014). We find that factor models generally
improve by factoring in the low-volatility factor across specifications after accounting for
factor asymmetry and investment frictions.
Lastly,weaccountformethodologicaluncertaintyinportfolioconstructionchoices. Menkveld
(2024) show that degrees of freedom in research design choices can lead to major variation in
outcomes, resulting in ”non-standard errors”. Soebhag, Van Vliet, and Verwijmeren (2024)
show that these errors are substantial in factor models and recommend researchers to con-
duct specification checks. Hence, we construct thousands of different versions of every factor
in our sample across a set of twelve factor construction choices. Our findings indicate that
the low-volatility factor adds to existing asset pricing models in the large majority of varia-
tions considered and is independent of a particular testing choice. Overall, we conclude that
the low-volatility factor consistently and robustly improves the performance of existing asset
pricing models when accounting for factor pricing asymmetry and investment frictions.
Our findings contribute to several important strands of literature. First, our study adds
to the growing body of literature on the comparison and selection of asset pricing models.
Barillas and Shanken (2017) argue that with traded factors, the comparison of asset pricing
6

--- Page 8 ---

models can be reduced to a comparison of the Sharpe ratios, which we heavily use in our
analyses. Fama and French (2018) use out-of-sample Sharpe ratios from bootstrap simu-
lations to compare models. Kan, Wang, and Zheng (2024) show that in-sample estimated
Sharpe ratios are overstated and recommends the use of out-of-sample Sharpe ratios. In
our study, we conduct both in-sample and out-of-sample model comparison tests. Other re-
lated studies compare major factor models in a horse-race (e.g. Ahmed, Bu, and Tsvetanov,
2019, Hou, Mo, Xue, and Zhang, 2019, Detzel, Novy-Marx, and Velikov, 2023, Barillas and
Shanken, 2018 and Hanauer, 2020), as do we. Closest to our study is DNV, who also con-
duct model selection of asset pricing models accounting for transaction costs. We extent on
their work by accounting for multiple additional investment frictions: investability, arbitrage
asymmetry, transaction costs (including shorting fees), and shorting constraints. Moreover,
our focus is to assess to what extent asset pricing models improve when the low-volatility
factor is included.
Second, we add to the extensive body of research on low-risk anomalies, which documents
the empirical regularity that low volatility or low beta stocks tend to outperform their high-
risk counterparts on a risk-adjusted basis, contrary to traditional asset pricing theory. This
includes the extensive literature on the betting-against-beta factor (Frazzini and Pedersen,
2014; Novy-Marx and Velikov, 2022), and papers examining drivers of the low-volatility
factor (e.g., Barroso, Detzel, and Maio, 2025). We contribute to this literature by showing
(i)theimportanceoffactorasymmetryofthelow-volatilityeffect-itsmainresultsaredriven
by the long leg, (ii) the low-volatility effect is robust after accounting for costs and other
investment frictions, and, most importantly, (iii) it should be factored into factor models.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We describe the factor data and
portfolio construction process in Section 2. Our main empirical results are presented in Sec-
tion 3. Section 4 presents robustness tests. Finally, Section 5 concludes.
7

--- Page 9 ---

2 Data and Factors
In this section, we outline the data and methodology used in our empirical analysis. In
Section 2.1, we describe how the low-volatility factor is constructed. In Section 2.2, we
introduce our set of asset pricing models, followed by the data description in Section 2.3.
Lastly, in Section 2.4, we provide several test specifications that incrementally account for
factor asymmetry and investment frictions. Overall, our primary objective is to assess the
model improvement after the inclusion of the low-volatility factor, including accounting for
factor asymmetry and investment frictions.
2.1 Constructing the Low-Volatility Factor
We follow the standard approach in constructing long-short factor portfolios: we construct
the low-volatility factor portfolio (VOL) using the standard deviation of daily excess returns
over the previous 252 trading days. We use a 2×3 sorting procedure that resembles that of
Fama and French (2015). At the end of each June, we categorize firms into Small (S) and
Big (B) groups based on market equity depending on whether the firm’s market equity is
below or above the NYSE median size breakpoint. Independently, each firm is also sorted in
three volatility groups based on prior 252-day return volatility at the end of month t−1. We
use 30% and 70% breakpoints based on NYSE firms. The intersection of these two groups
yields six portfolios.6 We compute the value-weighted excess returns for each portfolio. We
estimate 36-month rolling market betas by regressing the post-formation realized return
of these portfolios onto market excess returns, inspired by Novy-Marx and Velikov (2022).
Following Novy-Marx and Velikov (2022) and Barroso, Detzel, and Maio (2025), we define
6We obtain the following six portfolios: Small Low Volatility (SLV), Small Medium Volatility (SMV),
SmallHighVolatility(SHV),BigLowVolatility(BLV),BigMediumVolatility(BMV),andBigHighVolatil-
ity (BHV). Low (High) Volatility is the average of SLV (SHV) and BLV (BHV).
8

--- Page 10 ---

the VOL factor to target market beta-neutrality (in a zero-investment portfolio) as follows:
VOL = r −r −(β −β )∗MKT , (1)
t L,t H,t L,t−1 H,t−1 t
where β (β ) denotes the prior month’s market betas of the low- and high-
L,t−1 H,t−1
volatility legs, respectively, and MKT is the value-weighted excess market return.7 This
t
procedure avoids the errors-in-variables and illiquidity problems inherent in the procedure of
Frazzini and Pedersen (2014), which estimates betas as the holdings-weighted average beta
estimates of the stocks they hold and subsequently leverages stock exposures using these be-
tas (see Novy-Marx and Velikov, 2022).8 In Section 4.2 we consider alternative definitions of
the low-volatility factor, including leveraging the low-volatility legs using its portfolio betas,
as in Frazzini and Pedersen (2014); Baltussen, van Vliet, and Van Vliet (2023).
2.2 Candidate Factor Models
To conduct model comparison tests including and excluding the VOL factor, we use a wide
range of candidate models originating from Fama and French (2015), Hou and Zhang (2015),
Fama and French (2018), Barillas and Shanken (2018), and Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Sun
(2020). Table 1 provides summary statistics of the factors employed in the various factor
models. The table includes the stock-level characteristic used for portfolio construction, the
basic construction methodology, and the rebalancing frequency. A more detailed description
of each factor is provided in Appendix A. None of the candidate factor models contain
the VOL factor. In our study, we construct all factor models following similar procedures
as mentioned by the original authors. However, to limit degrees of freedom across factor
models and avoid resulting differences in factor performances due to methodological choices,
7To avoid excessive hedging, we cap portfolio betas between 0.25 and 2.0, and impose that the maximum
beta for low-volatility portfolios is restricted to 1.
8Intheabsenceofmarketexposurehedgingusing(β −β )∗MKT , theVOLfactorwouldyield
L,t−1 H,t−1 t
statisticallyinsignificantaveragereturns(asitrunsatamateriallynegativemarketbeta),despitedelivering
a significantly positive alpha relative to the market.
9

--- Page 11 ---

we consistently use the 30th and the 70th percentile as breakpoints, following Fama and
French (1993).9
2.3 Data
To construct the low-volatility and other factors, we obtain return and price data for U.S.
equities from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). Accounting information is
retrievedfromtheCompustatAnnualandQuarterlyFundamentalFiles. Oursampleconsists
of stocks listed on the NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq with share codes 10 or 11. We exclude
financial firms and firms with negative book-to-market ratios from our sample. The sample
period spans January 1972 to December 2023. We start in 1972 as we require quarterly
earnings announcement dates (to construct the price earnings announcement drift factor)
and quarterly book equity data (to construct the return on equity factor). To construct the
volatility factor, we use return data starting in January 1968.
2.4 Model Specifications
In this paper, we critically re-examine the role of the low-volatility factor in popular asset
pricing models, accounting for factor asymmetry and investment frictions. To this end,
we introduce a range of universe specifications that incrementally add various investment
frictions to our empirical analysis. We consider four specifications in total, discussed below.
2.4.1 Long-minus-Short Factors
Thestandardpracticeinacademicfactorportfoliosistoconstructhypotheticallongpositions
instockswithattractivecharacteristicsoffsetwithshortpositionsinstockswithunattractive
characteristics. Our baseline specification mimics this ’standard’ academic setting that often
ignores investment frictions.
9We refer to Soebhag, Van Vliet, and Verwijmeren (2024) and Section 4 for impact of this choice.
10

--- Page 12 ---

Departing from most academic studies, we impose two additional data filters to account
for investability. Several studies argue that equity anomalies are influenced by micro-caps
(Fama and French, 2008; Hou and Zhang, 2020), which are typically inaccessible for most
investors due to limited capacity and high trading costs. Micro-caps are on average only 3%
of the market value of the CRSP universe, but account for about 60% of the total number
of stocks (Hou and Zhang, 2020). Micro-caps have been shown to exhibit the highest cross-
sectional standard deviations in returns, are more likely to end in the extreme portfolios
of anomaly sorts (Fama and French (2008)), and may bias anomaly returns upwards. Due
to high transaction costs and illiquidity, anomaly returns in micro-caps are unlikely to be
achievable in practice. Nevertheless, micro-caps are typically included in many studies.
Hence excluding micro-caps provides a more realistic investable universe. To address this
concern, we filter out micro-caps by excluding stocks below the 20th NYSE size percentile
in the sorting month.
In addition, a commonly overlooked issue in empirical asset pricing research is data
missingness. Evaluating factor models requires data availability on all factor metrics per
stock or an explicit approach for dealing with missing data. Stock characteristic data is
oftenincomplete, especiallyforsmallerorlessfrequentlytradedfirms. Priorstudiesareoften
silent about their approach to dealing with missing data. For example, missing data are not
random and stock returns depend on missingness (Bryzgalova, Lerner, Lettau, and Pelger,
2024).10 To address this concern, we require stocks to have non-missing data for at least 9
out of 13 characteristics in the sorting month, and exclude all other stocks from our sample.
This filter helps balance the trade-off between coverage and quality, yielding a cleaner and
more robust sample for empirical analysis. As such, our factors are constructed using stocks
that are accessible for most investors and well-covered in terms of data availability.11
10Bryzgalova, Lerner, Lettau, and Pelger (2024) show that missing data are very prevalent in Compustat
fundamentals data, especially when considering multiple metrics, and importantly, missing data are not
random as stock returns depend on missingness.
11The results presented in this paper are not materially impacted by these two data filters.
11

--- Page 13 ---

Figure 1 plots the number of stocks over time, with and without the micro-cap and data
completeness filters. In the baseline specification, the sample begins with approximately
1,700 stocks, peaks at around 5,100 in 1999, and declines to roughly 3,000 by the end of
the sample period. Imposing the data completeness filter (“Data”) reduces the sample by
approximately 200 stocks per year, on average. The largest reduction occurs when excluding
micro-caps, as reflected by the “Micro” line in the figure. Consistent with Fama and French
(2008), this filter removes about 60% of the original sample. Applying the data completeness
filterontopofthemicro-capexclusioneliminatesanadditional50stocksperyear, suggesting
that missing data are concentrated in the micro-cap segment.
2.4.2 Long-plus-Short Factors
The “Long-minus-Short” specification assumes that both factor legs contain information
that is relevant for investor portfolios and for understanding asset prices. We depart from
this assumption by acknowledging that long and short legs are composed of distinct stocks
with different return drivers, risk exposures, limits to arbitrage, and investment frictions
(e.g., Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan, 2012, 2015; Blitz, Baltussen, and van Vliet, 2020). Conse-
quently, they may have distinct asset pricing implications, creating a potential factor pricing
asymmetry between the long and short legs of factors. Fama and French (2018) and Blitz,
Baltussen, and van Vliet (2020) provide first evidence of the impact of this factor asymmetry
onfactorcomparisons, astypicallyshortlegsoffactorsaremorecorrelated.12 Further, Stam-
baugh, Yu, and Yuan (2015) document that short sellers face greater limits to arbitrage than
long buyers, creating “arbitrage asymmetry” between overpriced and underpriced stocks. In
addition, shorting stocks involves additional frictions that affect investability, such as short-
selling related risks and costs. Factor models are based on the unique pricing power of a
factor and assume frictionless arbitrage. These assumptions may not hold when accounting
for real-world frictions.
12Related, Daniel and Moskowitz (2016) find that the short leg of the momentum factor tends to be the
main driver of momentum crashes.
12

--- Page 14 ---

Hence,wearguethatitisimportanttoexaminethelongandshortlegsoffactorpremiums
separately. For our second specification, we disentangle factor premiums into long-leg and
short-leg premiums. Each long-short factor can be broken down as follows:
R = R −R = (R −R )+(R −R ) (2)
L−S,t L,t S,t L,t mkt,t mkt,t S,t
where R , R and R are the long factor leg, the short factor leg, and the value-
L,t S,t mkt,t
weighted market return. We refer to (R −R ) and (R −R ) as the hedged long
L,t mkt,t mkt,t S,t
and short leg, respectively. For the volatility factor, the breakdown is based on equation 1,
where the long leg is (R −β R ) and the short leg is (β R −R ).13 For each
L,t L,t mkt,t S,t mkt,t S,t
factor model, we maintain the same set of factor portfolios as in the “Long-minus-Short”
case, but we allow the long and short legs to enter a factor model separately to account for
the gross exposure of each leg. Note that in practice highly liquid and cost-efficient index
futures can be used to hedge out the market exposure of each factor leg.
2.4.3 Factors Net of Transaction and Shorting Costs
Accounting for costs is a first-order concern for investors in practice. An approach focused
on gross returns favors factors that maximize model performance, irrespective of their trans-
action costs, potentially leading to misleading inferences as returns do not represent what is
realistically achievable by investors. A model’s ability to price assets reflects how close its
factors come to spanning the efficient frontier. If some combination of the model’s factors
are ex post mean-variance efficient, then no other asset can be used to improve performance.
However, investment frictions, such as transaction and shorting costs, can influence infer-
ence on factor models. In fact, strategies that require high transaction costs can improve
13Note that we opt for the market as the hedging portfolio. As pointed out by Blitz, Baltussen, and van
Vliet (2020), this might result into a size effect distortion: 50% of the long-leg consists of long small stocks,
whereas 50% of the short-leg shorts small stocks. To overcome this problem, a neutral hedging portfolio can
also be defined as 50% big stocks (B) plus 50% small stocks (S). We find similar results when using this
hedging portfolio.
13

--- Page 15 ---

the mean-variance frontier before costs but may fail to do so after costs, as shown by DNV,
as arbitrage capital can only be expected to eliminate true abnormal trading opportunities.
One could argue that the right factor model should be able to explain returns that fall out-
side the bounds given by such frictions. We address these concerns in our third specification
by accounting for transaction costs and shorting costs in factor portfolios.
We follow the approach of DNV and estimate individual stock-level transaction costs
usingthemethodofHasbrouck(2009). Thisprocedureyieldseffectivespreadsthatarehighly
correlated (≥95%) with those from the high-frequency Trade and Quote (TAQ) database
and allows for an estimation of effective spreads for public companies in the CRSP database
using their daily price series. The procedure entails estimating transaction costs using a
Bayesian-Gibbs sampler on the generalized stock price models of Roll (1984).
Investors in practice do not engage in naive portfolio construction, but reduce transaction
costs by cost-mitigating techniques that eliminate unrewarded turnover. A cost-mitigation
technique should reduce unnecessary turnover while maintaining a high exposure to a given
strategy’s underlying signal. Novy-Marx and Velikov (2016, 2019) compare commonly used
mitigation strategies, and finds that a banding strategy is most effective in reducing transac-
tion costs while maintaining exposure to the underlying factor used to select stocks. As such,
we apply a banding strategy with a bandwidth of 10% around the 30th & 70th percentiles
when constructing portfolios.14 We compute portfolio-level effective spreads, for a given leg,
as follows:
(cid:88)
Nt
TC = |W −W |∗c (3)
leg,t i,t i,t−1,end i,t
i=1
where c denotes the estimated transaction cost for stock i in period t.
i,t
14For example, when a stockenters the 80thpercentile based on a certain characteristic, we buy the stock
and hold this until it falls out of the hold range to below the 60th percentile. For market capitalization, for
which we use the NYSE median as a breakpoint, we change positions when a stock falls below (above) the
40th (60th) percentile on market capitalization. Note that banding affects both portfolio-level gross returns
and transaction costs.
14

--- Page 16 ---

Second, we account for shorting costs on the short leg of factors. Stocks in the short leg
typically have substantial shorting fees, and anomalies might even disappear for stocks with
low lending fees (Beneish, Lee, and Nichols, 2015; Drechsler and Drechsler, 2014; Muravyev,
Pearson, and Pollet, 2025). Muravyev, Pearson, and Pollet (2025) report an average borrow
fee of 1.64% per annum, while Drechsler and Drechsler (2014) report an average annual
shorting fee of 0.84% per annum, which, however, increases to approximately 1.24% for the
bottom three deciles—corresponding to the short legs of long-short strategies over a set of
eight anomalies.15 Since we do not directly observe shorting fees in our sample, we assume
a (slightly lower) fixed shorting fee (SF) of 1.00% per annum on the short leg of a factor.
Notethatusinghighershortingfeenumberswoulddecreasetheattractivenessofshortlegsof
factors. Moreover, elevated shorting costs for short legs of factors are especially pronounced
for anomalies tied to high-volatility stocks, such as those based on beta or idiosyncratic
volatility (see Drechsler and Drechsler, 2014; Muravyev, Pearson, and Pollet, 2025), and
hence our approach might understate the actual shorting fee for HV stocks and thereby
overstate its attractiveness.
Total portfolio costs for the long-short portfolios are equal to the sum of the transaction
costs and shorting fee of each leg. Hedged net returns of a long (short) leg of a factor f are
then given by16:
NetRet = Ret −Ret −TC (4)
long,t long,t mkt,t long,t
NetRet = Ret −Ret −TC −SF (5)
short,t mkt,t short,t short,t t
15Other studies find roughly similar levels of shorting fee. Kolasinski, Reed, and Ringgenberg (2013) find
annual costs generally above 100 bps between 2003 and 2007. Porras Prado, Saffi, and Sturgess (2016) find
average value-weighted loan fees of 116 bps per year between 2006 and 2010. Cohen, Deither, and Malloy
(2007) use proprietary lending data from a large institution and found average loan fees of around 400 bps
for small-cap stocks and 40 bps for large-cap stocks in the 1999–2003 period. Beneish, Lee, and Nichols
(2015) find a mean loan fee of 33.2 bps for the 10% easiest-to-borrow stocks between 2004 and 2013; the
amount quadrupled for the next 10% easiest-to-borrow stocks.
16Following DNV we assume that the market portfolio is free of transaction costs.
15

--- Page 17 ---

2.4.4 Net Long-Market Factors
In addition, the standard academic approach studies long-short factor returns under the
assumption that both legs contain information that is relevant for portfolios and for un-
derstanding asset prices. However, multiple studies argue that short-selling faces several
constraints (see, for example, Miller (1977), Shleifer and Vishny (1997), and Chen, Hong,
and Stein (2002)), especially for short legs of factors (e.g., Drechsler and Drechsler, 2014;
Muravyev, Pearson, and Pollet, 2025).17
This implies that mispricing on the short-leg may be considerably harder to correct
than on the long-leg. In addition, stocks can be sold short to a limited extent, not at all,
or may be recalled unexpectedly (see D’avolio, 2002 and Geczy, Musto, and Reed, 2002).
Furthermore, short-selling exhibits additional risks, including unlimited loss potential, short
squeezes, counterparty risk, and reputational concerns (Angel and McCabe, 2009). Finally,
legal impediments to short selling may exist. For instance, many countries have either a
partial or a full ban on short selling. Additionally, some mutual funds in the industry are
not allowed to short-sell by charter. As such, building efficient portfolios to capture the short
leg of factor premia may bring in additional risks and trading hurdles.
Inlightoftheseconsiderations,wearguethatstudyingthelong-onlydimensionseparately
reflectsanimportantviewofinvestorswhoharvestcommonfactorpremia. Hence, ourfourth
specification,“NetLong-Market”,considersonlythelonglegs(market-hedged)netoftrading
costs.
17Several studies have found that stocks designated for shorting by a factor strategy (i.e., the short legs)
are harder and more expensive to short. Geczy, Musto, and Reed (2002) show that growth stocks, loser
stocks, and small-cap stocks are significantly harder to short than other stocks. Beneish, Lee, and Nichols
(2015) find that the short returns for several accounting-based anomalies are attributable to special stocks;
the short sides of the profitability and investment stocks were present only among hard-to-borrow stocks,
and their returns became statistically indistinguishable from zero once shorting costs were accounted for.
Drechsler and Drechsler (2014) find more than triple the shorting fees for the short-leg value, momentum,
volatility-related, and profitability portfolios, and constraints on shorting execution substantially reduce
the profitability on the short side; profits disappear altogether for stocks with low lending fees (see also
Muravyev, Pearson, and Pollet, 2025).
16

--- Page 18 ---

3 Main Results
In this section, we present our main empirical results on factor model comparisons. We start
with summarizing factor returns across the various specifications in Section 3.1. Next, we
focus on in-sample model comparisons with maximal testing power to assess the added value
of the VOL factor to a range of asset pricing models in Section 3.2. We use both maximum
Sharpe ratio tests (see Barillas and Shanken, 2017; Fama and French, 2018) and test on how
VOL expands the efficient frontier across factor models (see Novy-Marx and Velikov, 2016).
Lastly, in Section 3.3, we employ out-of-sample techniques of Fama and French (2018) for
model comparison across factor models.
3.1 Factor Performances
Table 2 reports the average annualized returns for a broad set of commonly studied factors
over the period from January 1972 to December 2023. The table distinguishes between long-
short, long leg, and short leg of factors and considers both gross (Panel A) and net (Panel
B) returns, with net returns accounting for transaction and shorting costs. In Panel A, the
largest long-short average return is observed for the FIN (Financing) factor, yielding 7.18%
per annum, followed closely by the UMD (Momentum) factor, at 5.41%. The VOL factor
ranks third, with an average long-short return of 5.01% per annum. In contrast, CMA and
HML deliver relatively modest returns of 1.92% and 2.09% per annum.
d
Comparing the long and short legs of factor premia, we observe that for most factors, the
hedged long returns are higher than the hedged short returns. For example, long momentum
stocks earn 3.67% compared to 1.74% for low momentum stocks. Likewise, low volatility
stocks earn 3.18% outperformance per annum, whereas high volatility stocks earn 1.83% per
annum. Some other factors, such as HML and CMA, even exhibit near-zero average returns
on the corresponding short leg. Overall, on a gross basis, the short leg of factors seems to
contribute less than the long leg to the total factor return, reflecting an asymmetry in factor
17

--- Page 19 ---

performance.
Accounting for transaction and shorting costs substantially attenuates factor returns.
Panel B shows that FIN remains the factor with highest long-short return, averaging 3.83%
per annum. The VOL factor has the second highest average return of 3.22% per annum.
UMD, characterized by high turnover, incurs greater trading costs and delivers a post-cost
return of 2.17% per annum. Notably, PEAD significantly deteriorates in performance after
accounting for costs, with an average net return of -0.87% per annum. Distinguishing the
long and short legs, we find that most short factor legs actually exhibit negative net returns.
These summary statistics suggest that while several factor strategies generate econom-
ically significant gross returns, only a subset remains profitable on a net basis, and that
most of the net performance stems from the long side of factor returns. Moreover, the low-
volatility factor remains robust after accounting for costs, driven by the outperformance of
the long leg.
3.2 Model Comparison using In-sample Tests
3.2.1 Maximum Sharpe Ratios
In this section, we evaluate the performance of various asset pricing models with and without
the VOL factor. We use the maximum Sharpe ratio (SR) as our primary model evaluation
metric. The ability of an asset pricing model to price assets depends on the extent to
which its factors span the mean-variance efficient portfolio. If the tangency portfolio of the
factors in an asset pricing model is mean-variance efficient, then adding additional factors
does not improve the maximum squared Sharpe ratio. Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989)
and Barillas and Shanken (2017) show that the asset pricing model with the highest squared
Sharperatioofthemodelfactorsbestpricesthecross-sectionofassetreturns. Themaximum
18

--- Page 20 ---

Sharpe ratio is given by:
(cid:115)
ω′µ
SR = (max √ )2 (6)
ω
ω′Σω
where µ and Σ denote the mean return of factors and the variance-covariance matrix,
respectively. Note that for ease of interpretation we take the square-root of the squared
Sharpe ratio in what follows, a choice that maintains the ordering of competing asset pricing
models.
In the absence of transaction costs, the maximum Sharpe ratio is obtained by computing
the mean-variance efficient (MVE) portfolio using all factors within factor model f, which
has a closed-form solution. In case of net returns, the optimization problem is subject to the
constraint that the weights ω are non-negative and sum to one, following DNV.
i
WecomputethemaximumSharperatioforeachcandidatefactormodelwithandwithout
the VOL factor under each specification, and report the results in Table 3. We also report
the percentage increase in the maximum Sharpe ratio (%∆SR) after the inclusion of the
VOL factor relative to the factor model without the VOL factor, and the MVE weight of
the VOL factor (ω ) or its long and short legs (ω and ω , respectively) in each asset
VOL LV HV
pricing model.
Long-minus-Short. In Panel A of Table 3, we assess model improvements after VOL
inclusion using the standard “Long-minus-Short” specification without any consideration for
factor asymmetry or investment costs. Without the VOL factor, we find that the DHS factor
model results in the highest maximum Sharpe ratio (1.25), followed by the BS model with a
Sharpe of 1.23. Turning to the VOL factor, we find that its added value to factor models is
limited. Fama-French factor models marginally improve by between 0.18% and 1.96% when
including the volatility factor, with MVE weights ranging from 2.38 and 8.92%. Likewise,
the remaining factor models also do not improve much when including the VOL factor. For
example, the BS 6-factor model improves marginally (0.24%) and even assigns a negative
19

--- Page 21 ---

weight to the VOL factor (ω = −2.72%). Overall, under the classical “Long-minus-Short”
view, the VOL factor is spanned by other factors included in the factor models that we
consider, even though VOL ranks third in terms of average returns across all factors consid-
ered. Although the low-volatility factor has high average returns, it tends to be subsumed
by other factors like profitability and investment factors, in line with the earlier findings of
Novy-Marx (2014); Fama and French (2016). This result partly explains why the VOL, even
though popular in the industry, has not been included in major asset pricing models to date.
However, a limitation of this view is that it does not account for factor asymmetry, nor do
the results reflect what is actually achievable in practice by investors.
Long-plus-Short. In Panel B, we examine the “Long-plus-Short” view, where both
hedged long and short factors are used simultaneously in the factor models. Under this
view, each leg of a factor can have its own weight. We compare the factor models with
and without the inclusion of the VOL legs: LV and HV (both market-hedged). First, we
observe that the Sharpe ratios of all factor models improve relative to the “Long-minus-
Short” models, with the Sharpe ratio increasing on average from 1.11 to 1.28 across all
factor models considered. Interestingly, on average 42.77% weight is assigned to short legs
of factors, and hence the majority of weight (57.33%) to long legs. Second, we find that the
optimalSharperatiosacrossall“Long-plus-Short”modelsimprovewiththeinclusionofboth
volatility legs. For example, Fama-French factor models improve maximum Sharpe ratios
between 10.50% and 19.25% and assign weights between 25.48% and 30.65% to the hedged
low-volatility leg. For non-FF models, the LV factor obtains sizable weights between 15.59%
and 35.63%. On average “Long-plus-Short” factor models increase their Sharpe ratios by a
sizable 11.90% and assign a weight of 26.23% to low-volatility.
Interestingly, this decomposition offers a novel perspective on prior claims that the
low-volatility factor is subsumed by profitability and investment factors (Novy-Marx, 2014;
Fama and French, 2016). Once accounting for different asset pricing implications of long and
short legs of the low-volatility factor, we find a strong nuance: these prior findings arise due
20

--- Page 22 ---

to the short side of the low-volatility factor. High-volatility stocks exhibit strong correlations
with, for example, low profitability and high investment stocks, and thus add no incremental
pricing power once those factors enter the model. In contrast, the hedged long side of the
low-volatility factor contains distinct economic information and advances the performance
of factor models.
Net Long-plus-Short. Subsequently, we account for transaction costs on both legs and
shorting costs on the short leg in Panel C. Optimal Sharpe ratios of factor models become
naturally lower once we account for costs, but they are more realistic in terms of what is
achievable to the investor. On average, Sharpe ratios in Panel C drop by 33% compared to
those in Panel B. Accounting for costs decreases the attractiveness of most short legs, as the
weight to short legs averages to a relatively small 7.10%. Overall, we find that the highest
Sharpe ratios are obtained for the augmented Fama-French model (Fama and French, 2018).
with cash-based operating profitability and momentum factor, and the model of Barillas
and Shanken (2018). Furthermore, non-FF factor models tend to experience a larger drop
in Sharpe ratios after accounting for transaction costs. This is because most factors in those
models are rebalanced monthly, leading to higher turnover and transaction costs.
Most importantly, we find that the volatility factor, on a net-of-cost basis, improves
model performances across all factor models. The Sharpe ratio improvement across factor
models averages 13.01%, and ranges between 9.35% and 38.47%. Further, optimal weights
to the long leg, LV, averages 26.36% and ranges between 18.96% and 38.47%. In contrast,
weight to the short leg of VOL, HV, is zero across all factor models. The best performing
models remain the augmented Fama-French model (Fama and French, 2015) with cash-based
operating profitability and momentum, or the model shown by Barillas and Shanken (2018),
both including the low-volatility factor. In other words, accounting for factor asymmetry
and trading costs factors in the low-volatility factor into asset pricing models.
Net Long-Market. Finally, we adopt a long leg-only approach, thus only considering
long legs, in our analysis to account for the practical frictions associated with implementing
21

--- Page 23 ---

the short leg of factor strategies. Panel D presents the results. Excluding the short leg
essentially drops half of the number of portfolios in each factor model, but yields largely
similar models and maximum Sharpe ratios as the models that also considered short legs.
On average, we find that optimal Sharpe ratios of each factor model drop by a small 2%.
For some factor models, the optimal Sharpe ratios do not even change, since short legs
were assigned 0% in the mean-variance optimal portfolio. For HXZ and DHS, we find a
relatively larger drop in the optimal Sharpe ratio compared to Panel C, since the short legs
in those models receive considerable non-zero weights. Similar to Panels B and C, we find
that the addition of the low-volatility leg results in substantial factor model improvement.
On average, we find that factor models improve by 17.03%, and LV receives a considerable
weight of 29.07%. The augmented Fama-French factor model and the model of Barillas and
Shanken (2018) including the low-volatility leg remains the model with the highest optimal
Sharpe ratios.
In sum, while traditional asset pricing tests — assuming frictionless markets and un-
constrained shorting — find only marginal contributions from a standalone volatility factor,
our approach displays a different picture. Once factor asymmetry and trading frictions are
accountedfor, thelow-volatilitylegconsistentlydeliverseconomicallyandstatisticallysignif-
icant Sharpe improvements across factor models. This reconciliation between the academic
perspective and the sizable demand in the investment industry for low-risk exposures under-
scores that the true value of the low-volatility factor emerges when portfolios are constructed
using similar approaches and constraints as faced by real-world investors.
3.2.2 Efficient Frontier Expansion
The results from the previous sub-section have shown that VOL improves the performance
of an asset pricing model when factor asymmetry and investment frictions are taken into
account. Inthissubsection, wetesttheextenttowhichthemodelincludingthelow-volatility
factor (“M0+VOL”) expands the efficient frontier relative to the model excluding the factor
22

--- Page 24 ---

(“M0”).
To this end, we implement the multi-factor version of the generalized alpha of Novy-Marx
and Velikov (2016). We run a spanning regression of the excess returns of the ex-post MVE
portfolio constructed from “M0 + VOL” on the returns of the MVE portfolio using the
factors from model “M0”. This approach allows us to express both economic significance,
in terms of average alphas per year, and statistical significance of adding the low-volatility
factor to existing factor models. Table 4 reports the results for each factor model under each
specification. We report the annualized alphas (α) and corresponding t-statistics.
Long-minus-Short. In Panel A, under the classical “Long-minus-Short” specification,
adding the VOL factor produces virtually no expansion of the efficient frontier. The annual-
ized spanning alphas are small, varying between 0 bps and 13 bps per annum, and none are
statistically significant. This finding mirrors our maximum Sharpe results in Table 3, con-
firming that when factors are combined in a zero-cost, frictionless manner the incremental
information in the low-volatility factor is absorbed by the existing factor models.
Long-plus-Short. In Panel B, we consider the “Long-plus-Short” specification, where
both legs of a factor can receive their own weight. Overall, we find that the addition of
the low-volatility legs significantly expands the efficient frontier of factor models. Spanning
alphas range between 0.25% (BS model) and 0.62% (HXZ model), all statistically significant
at the 1% level. On average, the alpha of factor models increases by 0.43%.
Net Long-plus-Short. In Panel C, we consider all factor legs while accounting for
transactioncostsandshortingcosts. Weagainfindthattheadditionofthelow-volatilitylegs
significantly expands the efficient frontier of factor models. Spanning alphas are of similar
magnitude as in Panel B, with an average of 0.44%, and attain high levels of statistical
significance. Thus, accounting for factor asymmetry and investment frictions factors in low-
volatility in existing factor models.
Net Long-Market. Lastly, in Panel D, we exclude all short legs of factors. Again, these
results confirm earlier results presented in Table 3. The average spanning alpha increases to
23

--- Page 25 ---

0.56% and ranges between 0.35% and 1.08%. Furthermore, spanning alphas are statistically
significantforeveryfactormodel. EspeciallyfortheHXZandDHSmodel,wefindsubstantial
spanning alphas of 1.03% and 0.95% per annum, respectively. Consistent with our previous
results, we find significant gains from adding the low-volatility factor to existing asset pricing
models when taking factor asymmetry and real-life considerations into account.
3.3 Model Comparison using Out-of-Sample Tests
The results from the previous section show that the addition of the low-volatility factor
substantially improves ex-post maximum Sharpe ratios for a range of factor models, once we
depart from the classical “long-minus-short” view. Next, we turn to out-of-sample analyses.
In all our results so far, we have used full-sample estimation to compute maximum
Sharpe ratios. One disadvantage of our analysis is that factors may obtain excessive weights
in the MVE portfolio when these factors have high average returns relative to expected
returns. This will cause MVE-based weights to be overfitted, and consequently may bias
estimates of the maximum Sharpe ratio upward. The bias in estimating the maximum
Sharperatioisespeciallyproblematicwhencomparingnon-nestedmodels. Thebiasbecomes
more pronounced for smaller samples, as the parameter estimates have more sampling error.
To alleviate these concerns, we conduct two out-of-sample exercises. In sub-section 3.3.1,
we estimate MVE weights recursively using past data. In sub-section 3.3.2, we conduct a
bootstrapped-based simulation.
3.3.1 Recursive Estimation of MVE Portfolios
A simple way to reduce the bias obtained from in-sample (IS) estimation is to estimate MVE
weights recursively using information only available at the time of the portfolio formation,
i.e., in month t−1. Our recursive estimation requires a burn-in period of 10 years of data.
As such, our factor returns start in January 1982. We repeat the analysis conducted in Table
24

--- Page 26 ---

3, but now for the recursively estimated MVE portfolios. The results are reported in Table
5.
In Panel A, we consider the “Long-minus-Short” specification. Overall, we find that
the Sharpe ratios of factor models are lower than their in-sample Sharpe ratios from Table
3, suggesting that in-sample estimates are potentially upward biased. In line with the in-
sample results, though, we find that adding the VOL factor does not result in improvements
inthemaximumSharperatioofafactormodel. Infact,wefindthatfactormodelsmarginally
deteriorateout-of-sample(by-0.54%)intermsofout-of-sampleSharperatioswhenincluding
the VOL factor. On average, the weight of the VOL factor is again small (4.86%), with a
minimum and maximum of 0.01% and 7.94%, respectively.
In Panel B, we consider the “Long-plus-Short” specification. In line with the in-sample
results, we find that maximum out-of-sample Sharpe ratios improve substantially (13.66%,
on average) when including VOL. Sharpe ratios improve across all factor models, rang-
ing between 4.88% (DHS) and 24.24% (FF5), and allocations to the low-volatility leg vary
between 5.17% and 23.25%.
Accounting for transaction costs and shorting costs, as shown in Panel C, yields even
stronger results with Sharpe ratio improvements between 15.58% (FF5 ) and 27.32% (HXZ).
c
In Panel D, where we drop the short legs of portfolios, we find an average improvement of
30.15%, ranging between 16.58% (FF5M ) and 74.67% (HXZ) across factor models. More-
c
over, allocations to the low-volatility leg are again sizable, varying between 16.67% (FF5 )
c
and 48.37% (DHS). Overall, our out-of-sample recursive estimation results align with the
in-sample results from the previous section, with low-volatility improving factor models once
accounting for factor asymmetry and costs.
3.3.2 Bootstrapped Out-of-Sample Tests
Inadditiontoourrecursiveestimation, wealsoconductbootstrappedsimulations. Wefollow
the procedure of Fama and French (2018) and split the 624 months of our sample period
25

--- Page 27 ---

(January 1972 to December 2023), into 312 adjacent pairs: months (1,2), (3,4),···, (623,
624). In each bootstrap, we randomly select one month from the pair to be in-sample (IS),
the other to be out-of-sample (OS), and then draw 324 random pairs with replacement. For
each asset pricing model, we estimate the MVE weights as the weights on each factor that
yield the maximum Sharpe ratio over the 324 IS months. Subsequently, we compute the OS
portfolio return as the sum of the OS factor returns multiplied by the IS weights. For each
factor model, for both IS and OS periods, we compute the percentage of simulation runs
for which the factor model has the highest maximum Sharpe ratio across all factor models.
We name this percentage the ”win probability”. In case of ties, there is no ”winner” and
hence the total win probability does not necessarily sum up to 100%. We perform 10,000
simulation runs
Table 6 presents the bootstrapped IS and OS ”win” probabilities. The bottom row
reports the total probability of selecting any factor model with VOL as the ”winning” model
(Pr(VOL)). For the “Long-minus-Short” specification, reported in Panel A, we find that
DHS + VOL is selected in 53% of in-sample runs, followed by BS + VOL at 46%. However,
the IS estimates should be interpreted with caution, because the risk of overfitting is greater
in shorter samples (312 months of in-sample data). The OS estimates indicate that the BS
+ VOL model is the ”winning” model in 65% of runs, and that models that include VOL
are selected in 74% of cases
In Panel B, where we consider the “Long-plus-Short” specification, we find that the
OS Sharpe Ratio of the BS + VOL is greater than all other models in roughly 97% of
the bootstrap samples. In Panel C, accounting for transaction costs and shorting fees, we
observe that the OS Sharpe ratio of the HXZ + LV model is the highest in 31% of the
sample runs, followed by the FF5M + LV model (26%). Lastly, when dropping short legs
c
of the factors in Panel D, we find that FF5M + LV emerges as the factor model with the
c
highest OS Sharpe ratio in 28% of the time. In 79% of the simulation runs, we find that the
winning asset pricing model includes LV. Overall, both our IS and OS bootstrap sample
26

--- Page 28 ---

results confirm that including the VOL factor enhances asset pricing model performance
when accounting for real-world considerations.
4 Robustness
Results in the previous section have shown that adding the low-volatility factor materially
improves the performance of prominent factor models once one accounts for factor asym-
metry and trading frictions across in-sample and out-of-sample tests. In this section, we
run four additional robustness tests to further corroborate our findings and ensure that the
observed improvements are not driven by specific sample periods or model specifications.
First, in Section 4.1 we consider pre-1972 evidence of the VOL factor. Second, we consider
other definitions or measures of the low-volatility factor, such as betting-against-beta and
idiosyncratic volatility, in Section 4.2. Lastly, we perform a large-scale specification check
across a broad set of portfolio design choices in Section 4.3.
4.1 Pre-1972 Sample Evidence
Our results so far are based on the sample period from January 1972 to December 2023. In
this section, we extend our analysis by utilizing data that reaches back to the start of the
CRSP sample. Expanding the sample period helps increase the power of our empirical tests
and confirm robustness of the post-1972 sample results. We consider two extended sample
periods: as of January 1930 or as of July 1963. As of 1972, we have access to the PEAD
factor included in the DHS model, but availability of CMA, RMW or ROE factors starts as
of July 1963. Further, as of January 1930 (after a 4-year burn-in period to estimate beta),
only the Fama-French three-factor model, momentum, and the CAPM are available.
We summarize the results in Table 7 only for the “Long-minus-Short” and “net Long-
Market” specifications, in Panels A and B, respectively. In Panel A, we find that the low-
volatility factor significantly improves the CAPM between 1930 and 2023. Adding the VOL
27

--- Page 29 ---

factor increases the maximum Sharpe ratio by 33.92% and yields a spanning alpha of 2.79%
per annum (t-statistic = 3.86). We observe comparable results when we consider the Fama-
French 3-factor model. However, the VOL factor does not improve the 5-factor model (and
its variants) in the sample period 1963-2023, in line with our results presented above. These
results change when we account for factor asymmetry and trading costs, as shown in Panel
B. In the net long-only specification, we find net annualized alphas that range between
0.38% and 2.01%, all being statistically significant at the 1% level. Overall, this longer
sample evidence confirms that the low-volatility factor significantly improves factor model
performances.
4.2 Other Low-Risk Definitions
So far, we have computed the low-volatility factor using past 252-day return volatility as
a low-risk measure. In this section, we examine alternative definitions and low-risk mea-
sures. First, we construct a low-volatility factor based on 3-year monthly return volatility
(VOL ). Increasing the look-back period to three years may yield a more stable volatility
36M
estimate, thereby reducing turnover and transaction costs of the low-volatility factor.
Second,ourfactorconstructionmethodologydoesnotembedanysectorstructure. Danielet
al.(2020)showsthatthestandard,unconditional,long-shortapproachleadstounpricedrisks
and exposures, and potentially excessive concentration in a few sectors. This, in turn, gives
risetosector-specificrisk. Sector-concentratedportfolioshavelessdiversificationsincestocks
in the same sectors are correlated. To address this issue, we construct industry-neutral low-
volatility factor portfolios, (VOL ), to reduce sector-related concentration risks. Whereas
Ind
unconditional factors sort stocks into portfolios by the raw return predictors, our industry-
neutral factors are constructed using industry-adjusted predictors. Specifically, the industry-
adjusted predictor subtracts the cross-sectional industry median of the raw predictor and
scales the result by the within-industry range.
28

--- Page 30 ---

Third, we construct a leveraged low-volatility factor (VOL ). Our approach thus
Levered
far has focused on low-volatility zero-investment factor portfolios using market beta hedging,
as in Novy-Marx and Velikov (2022); Barroso, Detzel, and Maio (2025). Another approach
common in the literature is to achieve market neutrality by leveraging up (down) the low-
volatility (high-volatility) leg using its market beta to target a market-neutral factor (e.g.,
Frazzini and Pedersen, 2014; Blitz, Baltussen, and van Vliet, 2020; Baltussen, van Vliet,
and Van Vliet, 2023). More specifically, each month t we scale the low (high) volatility
portfolio’s excess return by its ex-ante market beta from month t − 1.18 Asset pricing
theory and the maximum Sharpe ratio test build upon unlimited leverage assumptions (e.g.,
Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken, 1989), implying that the choice of leveraging the low-volatility
factor to market-neutrality should not materially impact factor model inference.
Lastly, we construct four alternative low-volatility measures. Instead of using past 252-
day return volatility, we use 252-day idiosyncratic return volatility (IVOL) (Ang, Hodrick,
Xing, and Zhang, 2006), market beta (BAB) (Frazzini and Pedersen, 2014), downside
beta (DBETA) (Ang, Chen, and Xing, 2006), or downside volatility (DVOL) (Post and
Van Vliet, 2006). The factors are constructed in the same manner as our main VOL factor,
targeting market neutrality following Novy-Marx and Velikov (2022); Barroso, Detzel, and
Maio (2025). For the IVOL factor, we sort by the idiosyncratic volatility at the end of the
previous month, where idiosyncratic volatility is based on residuals obtained from regressing
excess returns on the 3-factor model of Fama and French (1993) using past 252-day returns.
For the BAB factor, we sort stocks by their market beta at the end of the previous month,
where market beta is computed using past 252-day returns. For the DBETA factor, we sort
on the market beta (restricted to negative market days) using past 252-day returns. For the
DVOL factor, we sort on the downside volatility (negative stock return days) using past
252-day returns.
18We estimate beta using a 36-month rolling window and cap betas between 0.25 and 2.00 to limit the
impact of estimation noise. Note that the resulting market beta of each leg equals unity, and market-
neutralityofeachseparatefactorlegisachievedbyhedgingouttheexcessmarketreturn. Further,notethat
this approach uses borrowing at the risk-free rate to achieve market-neutrality with zero net investment.
29

--- Page 31 ---

As in Section 3.2.2, we compute the multi-factor version of the generalized alpha, where
we compute the MVE portfolio excess return series for models M0 and M0 + LowRisk,
where LowRisk is one of the aforementioned low-risk factors. For brevity, we only report
spanning alphas and corresponding t-statistics for the “Long-minus-Short” specification and
the “Net Long-Market” specification. We report the results in Table 8.
InPanelA,underthestandard“Long-minus-Short”specification, addinganyoftheseven
LowRisk factors results in virtually no expansion of the in-sample efficient frontier. This
finding is consistent with Table 4. Panel B shows the results for net returns under a long-
only perspective. Unlike Panel A, all low-volatility factor measures exhibit economically and
statistically significant spanning alphas. Further, the alternative VOL specifications per-
form comparably, each exhibiting significant alphas across all models. This shows that our
main results are robust to using longer look-back periods, addressing sector concentration,
applying leverage to equalize market exposure, or using idiosyncratic, beta or downside risk
measures. These results further corroborate the notion that the low-volatility factor signifi-
cantly improves asset pricing models once accounting for factor asymmetry and investment
frictions.
4.3 Portfolio Design Choices
So far, we have focused on a specific set of portfolio design choices. In our final robust-
ness test, we consider a broad range of portfolio design choices. Menkveld (2024) show that
degrees of freedom in research design choices can lead to major variation in outcomes, re-
sulting in “non-standard errors”. Soebhag, Van Vliet, and Verwijmeren (2024) show that
non-standarderrorsaresubstantialasportfoliodesignchoicesmateriallyaffectfactorreturns
and model selection exercises. They recommend researchers to conduct specification checks
to mitigate concerns that results are driven by selecting a particular set of choices. We also
construct thousands of different versions of every factor in our sample across a set of 12
factor construction choices.
30

--- Page 32 ---

Specifically, we alternate between the following decisions: 30-70 breakpoints versus 20-80
(i), NYSE versus full-sample breakpoints (ii), including versus excluding financial firms (iii),
applyingindustryneutralizationornot(iv),independentversusdependentsorts(v),monthly
rebalancing or yearly (at the end of June) (vi), value-weighting returns or equal-weighting
(vii), including or excluding micro-caps (viii), remove or keep stocks with negative book-to-
market ratios (ix), remove or keep stocks with prices below 5 dollars in the sorting month
(x), include or exclude utility stocks (xi), and banding portfolio returns and transaction
costs (xii).19 Combining these 12 choices results in 4,096 unique specifications, and thereby
different versions of factor returns. For each, we compute the returns and run our model
selection exercises.
Figure 2 illustrates the distribution of Sharpe ratios for various non-market and non-size
equity factors based on the 4,096 distinct factor construction specifications. Each density
plot represents the empirical distribution of Sharpe ratios for hedged long-leg portfolios,
with transaction costs accounted for. The shape of these distributions offers insight into the
robustnessandperformanceconsistencyofeachfactorunderdiverseconstructionmethodolo-
gies. Most notably, the low-volatility factor exhibits an empirical Sharpe ratio distribution
concentrated at higher Sharpe ratios, suggesting stronger and more consistent risk-adjusted
returns across different portfolio specifications. For example, the low-volatility has the sec-
ond highest mean (median) Sharpe ratio of 0.605 (0.612). The standard deviation of the
Sharpe ratio of the low volatility factor is 0.10. In contrast, factors such as high PEAD and
ROE show more dispersed distributions.
Lastly, weassessfactormodelimprovementsaftertheinclusionofthelow-volatilityfactor
across all choice sets. Table 9 reports the average maximum Sharpe ratio per factor model
with and without the low-volatility factor, the alpha improvement of the MVE-efficient
portfolio, and the fraction of choice sets for which the alpha is statistically significant at
the 5% level. Panel A considers the Long-minus-Short factor models without accounting for
19All factors are constructed via 2-by-3 sorting on size and a factor characteristic.
31

--- Page 33 ---

factor asymmetry and costs. Average Sharpe ratios without the low-volatility factor (SR )
w/o
range from 1.14 (FF5) to 1.56 (BS6) and increase only marginally once the low-volatility
factor is included. The fraction of specifications for which the spanning alpha is statistically
significant (at the 5% level) does not exceed 35%. These results are consistent with our
baseline analysis from Section 3.
In Panel B, we consider the Long-Market factor models net of costs. SR ranges
w/o
between 0.82 (DHS) and 1.20 (BS6), and improve substantially to between 0.90 (DHS) and
1.32 (BS6) once we include the low-volatility leg. Spanning alphas range between 0.40% and
0.70%peryear,andthefractionofspecificationswithstatisticallysignificantspanningalphas
is between 69% and 97%. Thus, adding the low-volatility factor substantially improves the
net performance of long-only factor models across thousands of testing variations. Overall,
we conclude that the low-volatility factor consistently improves the performance of existing
asset pricing models when accounting for factor pricing asymmetry and investment frictions.
5 Conclusion
Although extensively supported by academic research and adopted in the investment man-
agement industry, the low-volatility factor remains absent from factor models. We show that
this paradox stems from factor asymmetry and investment frictions not sufficiently consid-
ered in most academic studies. Incorporating factor asymmetry and investment frictions
reveals that the low-volatility factor deserves a central place in asset pricing models. While
redundant in a frictionless setting, its long leg carries unique pricing information overlooked
whentreatedsymmetricallywithitsshortleg. Thelow-volatilityfactorsignificantlyimproves
all major factor models, increasing Sharpe ratios by 13–17% and receiving 26–29% alloca-
tion in efficient portfolios. Robustness checks, including out-of-sample validation, extended
time samples, alternative measurements, and thousands of variations in factor construction
methods, confirm the consistency of these findings.
32

--- Page 34 ---

Our study shows that the low-volatility factor plays a prominent role in asset pricing
models once factor asymmetry and frictions are considered, with broader implications. We
illustrate how departures from standard specifications can alter research conclusions. We
encourage researchers to be mindful of investment frictions in asset pricing tests. While
this paper addresses transaction and shorting costs, other frictions, such as tax efficiency,
investment horizon, and slippage, remain largely unexplored. A valuable future avenue for
research is to assess these frictions’ impact on asset pricing models or develop frameworks
that robustly reflect real-world settings, rather than an idealized world.
33

--- Page 35 ---

References
Ahmed, Shamim, Ziwen Bu, and Daniel Tsvetanov, 2019, Best of the Best: A Comparison
of Factor Models, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 54, 1713–1758.
Ang, Andrew, Joseph Chen, and Yuhang Xing, 2006, Downside Risk, The review of financial
studies 19, 1191–1239.
Ang, Andrew, Robert J Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2006, The Cross-section
of Volatility and Expected Returns, The Journal of Finance 61, 259–299.
Ang,Andrew,RobertJ.Hodrick,YuhangXing,andXiaoyanZhang,2009,Highidiosyncratic
volatility and low returns: International and further U.S. evidence, Journal of Financial
Economics 91, 1–23.
Angel, James J, and Douglas M McCabe, 2009, The Business Ethics of Short Selling and
Naked Short Selling, Journal of Business Ethics 85, 239–249.
Asness, Clifford, and Andrea Frazzini, 2013, The Devil in HML’s Details, The Journal of
Portfolio Management 39, 49–68.
Auer, Benjamin R, and Frank Schuhmacher, 2015, Liquid Betting against Beta in Dow Jones
Industrial Average Stocks, Financial Analysts Journal 71, 30–43.
Baker, and Robert A Haugen, 2012, Low Risk Stocks Outperform within All Observable
Markets of the World, Available at SSRN 2055431.
Baker, Malcolm, Brendan Bradley, and Ryan Taliaferro, 2014, The Low Risk Anomaly: A
Decomposition into Micro and Macro Effects, Financial Analysts Journal 70, 43–58.
Baker, Malcolm, Brendan Bradley, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2011, Benchmarks as Limits to
Arbitrage: Understanding the Low-Volatility Anomaly, Financial Analysts Journal 67,
40–54.
Bali, Turan G, Nusret Cakici, and Robert F Whitelaw, 2011, Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries
and the cross-section of expected returns, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 427–446.
Ball, Ray, Joseph Gerakos, Juhani T Linnainmaa, and Valeri Nikolaev, 2016, Accruals, cash
flows, and operating profitability in the cross section of stock returns, Journal of Financial
Economics 121, 28–45.
Baltussen, Guido, Laurens Swinkels, and Pim Van Vliet, 2021, Global factor premiums,
Journal of Financial Economics 142, 1128–1154.
Baltussen, Guido, Bart van Vliet, and Pim Van Vliet, 2023, The Cross-Section of Stock
Returns before 1926 (and beyond), Available at SSRN 3969743.
Barillas, Francisco, and Jay Shanken, 2017, Which Alpha?, The Review of Financial Studies
30, 1316–1338.
34

--- Page 36 ---

Barillas, Francisco, and Jay Shanken, 2018, Comparing Asset Pricing Models, The Journal
of Finance 73, 715–754.
Barroso, Pedro, Andrew Detzel, and Paulo Maio, 2025, The Volatility Puzzle of the Beta
Anomaly, Journal of Financial Economics 165, forthcoming.
Beneish, Messod Daniel, Charles MC Lee, and D Craig Nichols, 2015, In short supply:
Short-sellers and stock returns, Journal of Accounting and Economics 60, 33–57.
Black, Fischer, Michael C Jensen, and Myron Scholes, 1972, The Capital Asset Pricing
Model: Some Empirical Tests, .
Blitz, David, Guido Baltussen, and Pim van Vliet, 2020, When Equity Factors Drop Their
Shorts, Financial Analysts Journal 76, 73–99.
Blitz, David C., van Vliet Pim, 2007, The Volatility Effect, The Journal of Portfolio Man-
agement 34, 102–113.
Blitz, David, van Vliet Pim Baltussen Guido, 2020, The Volatility Effect Revisited, The
Journal of Portfolio Management 46, 45–63.
Bryzgalova, Svetlana, Sven Lerner, Martin Lettau, and Markus Pelger, 2024, Missing Finan-
cial Data, The Review of Financial Studies p. hhae036.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, and Jeremy C Stein, 2002, Breadth of ownership and stock
returns, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 171–205.
Cohen, Lauren, Karl B. Deither, and Christopher J. Malloy, 2007, Supply and Demand
Shifts in the Shorting Market, The Journal of Finance 62, 2061–2096.
Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Lin Sun, 2020, Short- and Long-Horizon Behavioral
Factors, The Review of Financial Studies 33, 1673–1736.
Daniel, Kent, and Tobias J Moskowitz, 2016, Momentum crashes, Journal of Financial
Economics 122, 221–247.
Daniel et al., Kent., 2020, The Cross-Section of Risk and Returns, The Review of Financial
Studies 33, 1927–1979.
Davis, James L, Eugene F Fama, and Kenneth R French, 2000, Characteristics, Covariances,
and Average Returns: 1929 to 1997, The Journal of Finance 55, 389–406.
Detzel, Andrew, Robert Novy-Marx, and Mihail Velikov, 2023, Model Comparison with
Transaction Costs, The Journal of Finance 78, 1743–1775.
Drechsler, Itamar, and Qingyi Freda Drechsler, 2014, The Shorting Premium and Asset
Pricing Anomalies, Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
D’avolio, Gene, 2002, The market for borrowing stock, Journal of Financial Economics 66,
271–306.
35

--- Page 37 ---

Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics.
Fama,EugeneF,andKennethRFrench,2008,DissectingAnomalies,The Journal of Finance
63, 1653–1678.
Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 2015, A five-factor asset pricing model, Journal of
Financial Economics 116, 1–22.
Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 2016, Dissecting Anomalies with a Five-Factor
Model, The Review of Financial Studies 29, 69–103.
Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 2018, Choosing Factors, Journal of Financial
Economics 128, 234–252.
Frazzini, Andrea, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2014, Betting against beta, Journal of Financial
Economics 111, 1–25.
Geczy, Christopher C, David K Musto, and Adam V Reed, 2002, Stocks are special too: An
analysis of the equity lending market, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 241–269.
Gibbons, Michael R, Stephen A Ross, and Jay Shanken, 1989, A Test of the Efficiency of a
Given Portfolio, Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society pp. 1121–1152.
Hanauer, Matthias X, 2020, A Comparison of Global Factor Models, Available at SSRN
3546295.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 2009, Trading Costs and Returns for U.S. Equities: Estimating Effective
Costs from Daily Data, The Journal of Finance 64, 1445–1477.
Haugen, Robert A., and A. James Heins, 1975, Risk and the Rate of Return on Financial As-
sets: Some Old Wine in New Bottles, The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
10, 775–784.
Hou, Kewei, Haitao Mo, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang, 2019, Which Factors?, Review of Finance
23, 1–35.
Hou,Kewei,XueChen,andLuZhang,2015,DigestingAnomalies: AnInvestmentApproach,
The Review of Financial Studies 28, 650–705.
Hou,Kewei,XueChen,andLuZhang,2020,ReplicatingAnomalies,The Review of Financial
Studies 33, 2019–2133.
Houweling, Patrick, and Jeroen Van Zundert, 2017, Factor Investing in the Corporate Bond
Market, Financial Analysts Journal 73, 100–115.
Jensen, Theis Ingerslev, Bryan Kelly, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2023, Is There a Replication
Crisis in Finance?, The Journal of Finance 78, 2465–2518.
36

--- Page 38 ---

Kan, Raymond, Xiaolu Wang, and Xinghua Zheng, 2024, In-sample and out-of-sample
Sharpe ratios of multi-factor asset pricing models, Journal of Financial Economics 155,
103837.
Kolasinski, AdamC., AdamV.Reed, andMatthewC.Ringgenberg, 2013, AMultipleLender
ApproachtoUnderstandingSupplyandSearchintheEquityLendingMarket,The Journal
of Finance 68, 559–595.
Menkveld, Albert J. Dreber, Anna Holzmeister Felix Huber Ju¨rgen Johannesson Magnus
Kirchler Michael Neusu¨ss Sebastian Razen Michael Weitzel Utz, 2024, Nonstandard
Errors, The Journal of Finance 79, 2339–2390.
Miller, Edward M, 1977, Risk, Uncertainty, and Divergence of Opinion, The Journal of
Finance 32, 1151–1168.
Muravyev, Dmitriy, Neil D Pearson, and Joshua Matthew Pollet, 2025, Anomalies and Their
Short-Sale Costs, Available at SSRN 4266059.
Novy-Marx,Robert,2014,UnderstandingDefensiveEquity,Workingpaper,NationalBureau
of Economic Research.
Novy-Marx, Robert, and Mihail Velikov, 2016, Taxonomy of Anomalies and Their Trading
Costs, The Review of Financial Studies 29, 104–147.
Novy-Marx, Robert, and Mihail Velikov, 2019, Comparing Cost-Mitigation Techniques, Fi-
nancial Analysts Journal 75, 85–102.
Novy-Marx, Robert, and Mihail Velikov, 2022, Betting against betting against beta, Journal
of Financial Economics 143, 80–106.
Porras Prado, Melissa, Pedro A. C. Saffi, and Jason Sturgess, 2016, Ownership Structure,
Limits to Arbitrage, and Stock Returns: Evidence from Equity Lending Markets, The
Review of Financial Studies 29, 3211–3244.
Post, Thierry, and Pim Van Vliet, 2006, Downside Risk and Asset Pricing, Journal of Bank-
ing & Finance 30, 823–849.
Roll,Richard,1984,ASimpleImplicitMeasureoftheEffectiveBid-AskSpreadinanEfficient
Market, The Journal of Finance 39, 1127–1139.
Schneider, Paul, Christian Wagner, and Josef Zechner, 2020, Low-Risk Anomalies?, The
Journal of Finance 75, 2673–2718.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W Vishny, 1997, The Limits of Arbitrage, The Journal of
Finance 52, 35–55.
Soebhag, Amar, Bart Van Vliet, and Patrick Verwijmeren, 2024, Non-standard errors in
asset pricing: Mind your sorts, Journal of Empirical Finance p. 101517.
37

--- Page 39 ---

Stambaugh, Robert F, Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan, 2012, The short of it: Investor sentiment
and anomalies, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 288–302.
Stambaugh, Robert F, Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan, 2015, Arbitrage Asymmetry and the
Idiosyncratic Volatility Puzzle, The Journal of Finance 70, 1903–1948.
38

--- Page 40 ---

Table 1: Candidate Asset Pricing Models
This table lists the non-market factors used by the asset pricing model, indicated by a ✓in the columns headed by the model names. We provide
three properties of the factor construction methodology: the sorting characteristic (”Characteristic”), the rebalancing frequency (”Rebalancing”),
and the sorting method (”Construction”). In each model, factor returns are defined as the equal-weighted average of the returns on the portfolios
with high (or low) values of the primary sorting characteristic minus the equal-weighted average of the portfolios with low (or high) values. SMB
returns are given by the simple average of the returns on all portfolios with low size minus the average of the returns on all portfolios with large
size in three independent 2x3 sorts of stocks on size and each of the following characteristics: book-to-market, growth in book assets, and operating
profitability(orcashprofitability). MEreturnsaregivenbythesimpleaverageofthereturnsonallportfolioswithlowsizeminusthosewithlargesize
in 2x3x3 sorts on size, growth in book assets, and return on equity. FF5 (FF5M) denote the Fama and French (2015) five-factor model (augmented
with UMD). FF5 and FF5M denote versions of the FF5 and FF5M, respectively, that use cash-based operating profitability instead of accruals
c c
operating profitability Fama and French (2018). HXZ denotes the Hou and Zhang (2015) four-factor model. BS denotes the Barillas and Shanken
(2018) six-factor model. DHS denotes the Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Sun (2020) three-factor behavioural model.
Factor Characteristic Rebalancing Construction FF5 FF5M FF5 FF5M HXZ BS DHS
c c
SMB Market capitalization Annual 2x3 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
HML Book-to-market Annual 2x3 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
CMA Growth in book assets Annual 2x3 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
RMW Accruals operating profitability Annual 2x3 ✓ ✓
RMW Cash operating profitability Annual 2x3 ✓ ✓
cp
MOM R Monthly 2x3 ✓ ✓ ✓
t−12,t−2
ME Market capitalization Monthly 2x3x3 ✓
IA Growth in book assets Monthly 2x3x3 ✓ ✓
ROE Quarterly returns-on-equity Monthly 2x3x3 ✓ ✓
HML Book-to-market Monthly 2x3 ✓
m
FIN Net and composite share iss ance Annual 2x3 ✓
PEAD 4-day CAR earnings announcements Monthly 2x3 ✓
39

--- Page 41 ---

Figure 1: Universe Coverage Over Time
Thisfigureshowstheannualnumberofstocksincludedinthesampleundervariousfilteringcriteria. ”Base”
refers to the full sample with no filters applied. ”Data” removes stocks with fewer than 9 (out of 13) non-
missingsortingcharacteristicsinagivenmonth. ”Micro”excludesstocksbelowthe20thpercentileofNYSE
market capitalization. ”Investability” applies both the Data and Micro filters simultaneously. The sample
period spans from January 1968 to December 2023.
40

--- Page 42 ---

Table 2: Factor Summary Statistics
This table presents average annualized returns of non-market factors using gross (Panel A) and net returns
(Panel B). Net returns account for transaction and shorting costs. VOL is the low volatility factor. SMB,
HML,RMWandCMAdenotetheFamaandFrench(2015)size, value, profitability, andinvestmentfactors,
respectively. SMB , UMD and RMW denotes the Fama and French (2018) size, momentum and cash
c c
profitabilityfactor, respectively. ME,ROE,andIAdenotetheHouandZhang(2015)size, profitability, and
investment factors, respectively. HML(m) denotes the monthly updated value factor of Asness and Frazzini
(2013). FIN and PEAD are the financing and post-earning announcement drift factor of Daniel, Hirshleifer,
and Sun (2020). “L–S”, “L–M”, and “M–S” refer to long-minus-short, long-minus-market (i.e., long leg),
and market-minus-short (i.e., short leg) returns. The sample period is January 1972 to December 2023.
Panel A: Gross Panel B: Net
L-S L-M M-S L-S L-M M-S
VOL 5.01 3.18 1.83 3.22 2.70 0.52
SMB 2.01 1.95 0.06 0.50 1.68 -1.19
SMB 2.06 1.98 0.08 0.49 1.66 -1.18
cp
HML 2.09 1.97 0.12 1.06 2.06 -1.00
HML 2.62 2.59 0.03 0.87 2.16 -1.29
d
RMW 3.07 2.15 0.92 1.19 1.90 -0.71
RMW 4.28 2.86 1.42 2.02 2.19 -0.17
cp
CMA 1.92 1.96 -0.03 0.70 1.97 -1.26
UMD 5.41 3.67 1.74 2.17 2.52 -0.35
ME 2.21 2.01 0.19 -0.12 1.22 -1.34
IA 2.80 2.20 0.59 1.07 1.81 -0.74
ROE 4.67 3.20 1.47 2.39 2.52 -0.13
PEAD 3.45 2.44 1.01 -0.87 0.92 -1.79
FIN 7.18 4.57 2.61 3.83 3.73 0.10
41

--- Page 43 ---

Table 3: Ex Post Mean-Variance Efficient Portfolios
This table presents the ex post maximum Sharpe Ratio of each factor model without (SR ) and with
w/o
(SR )thevolatilityfactor. PanelAconsidersstandardlong-shortfactors(’Long-Short’). PanelBconsiders
w
long and short legs of factors as separate portfolios in the opportunity set (’Long-Plus-Short’). Panel C is
equivalent to Panel B, but accounts for transaction and shorting costs (’Net Long-Plus-Short’). Panel D
considers only the long legs of factors while accounting for transaction costs (’Net Long-Market’). %∆SR
is the percentage improvement in SR of a factor model when adding the volatility factor. ω , ω , ω
VOL LV HV
are the weights of the volatility factor, its long leg, and short leg in the ex post mean-variance portfolio of
a factor model. For Panel B and C, we add ω , or the net allocation to short factor legs in the factor
Short
model (including the low-volatility factor). The column ’Avg.’ summarizes the average results across all
factor models. The sample period is January 1972 to December 2023.
Panel A: Long-Short
FF5 FF5M FF5 FF5M HXZ BS DHS Avg.
c c
SR 0.87 1.03 1.09 1.19 1.08 1.23 1.25 1.11
w/o
SR 0.89 1.04 1.09 1.19 1.08 1.23 1.25 1.11
w
%∆SR 1.96 0.85 0.39 0.18 0.34 0.03 0.24 0.57
ω 8.92 5.48 3.67 2.38 3.40 -0.98 -2.72 2.88
VOL
Panel B: Long-Plus-Short
FF5 FF5M FF5 FF5M HXZ BS DHS Avg.
c c
SR 0.90 1.06 1.10 1.21 1.12 1.38 1.28 1.15
w/o
SR 1.08 1.22 1.23 1.34 1.25 1.50 1.37 1.28
w
%∆SR 19.25 15.10 11.98 10.50 11.80 8.32 6.35 11.90
ω 30.65 29.03 25.48 25.57 35.63 15.59 21.66 26.23
LV
ω -12.01 -10.23 -10.81 -9.63 -18.05 -5.68 -11.96 -11.20
HV
ω 52.23 46.79 46.92 41.31 21.89 57.58 32.65 42.77
Short
Panel C: Net Long-Plus-Short
FF5 FF5M FF5 FF5M HXZ BS DHS Avg.
c c
SR 0.68 0.75 0.78 0.83 0.73 0.85 0.75 0.77
w/o
SR 0.79 0.87 0.85 0.92 0.86 0.94 0.82 0.86
w
%∆SR 15.83 16.66 9.35 11.30 17.53 10.98 9.44 13.01
ω 28.65 23.03 22.12 19.71 33.55 18.96 38.47 26.36
LV
ω 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
HV
ω 0.00 0.00 10.92 6.69 18.19 0.00 13.88 7.10
Short
Panel D: Net Long-Market
FF5 FF5M FF5 FF5M HXZ BS DHS Avg.
c c
SR 0.68 0.75 0.76 0.81 0.63 0.84 0.69 0.74
w/o
SR 0.79 0.87 0.84 0.92 0.84 0.94 0.79 0.86
w
%∆SR 15.84 16.83 11.76 13.54 34.07 12.56 14.65 17.03
ω 28.65 23.03 21.67 19.54 38.36 18.96 53.30 29.07
LV
42

--- Page 44 ---

Table 4: Spanning Regressions
This table reports the annualized alpha obtained from regressing the ex post mean-variance efficient factor
model including the volatility factor against the efficient factor model portfolio without the volatility factor.
The row ’Avg.’ summarizes the average results across all factor models. Panels are defined as in Table 3.
The sample period is January 1972 to December 2023. The t-statistics (t(α)) are Newey-West adjusted
with 6 lags, and are reported in the second column of each Panel within parentheses. Asterisks indicate
significance at the 10% (*), 5% (**) or 1% (***) level.
Panel A Panel B Panel C Panel D
α t(α) α t(α) α t(α) α t(α)
FF5 0.13 (1.20) 0.50∗∗∗ (3.90) 0.48∗∗∗ (2.72) 0.48∗∗∗ (2.73)
FF5M 0.06 (0.89) 0.49∗∗∗ (3.92) 0.41∗∗∗ (3.04) 0.42∗∗∗ (3.03)
FF5 0.03 (0.64) 0.40∗∗∗ (3.44) 0.32∗∗ (2.28) 0.35∗∗ (2.54)
c
FF5M 0.02 (0.46) 0.41∗∗∗ (3.49) 0.32∗∗∗ (2.67) 0.35∗∗∗ (2.91)
c
HXZ 0.03 (0.59) 0.62∗∗∗ (3.61) 0.70∗∗∗ (3.16) 1.03∗∗∗ (3.99)
BS 0.00 (0.19) 0.25∗∗∗ (3.69) 0.29∗∗∗ (2.84) 0.35∗∗∗ (3.00)
DHS 0.03 (0.54) 0.36∗∗∗ (2.96) 0.56∗∗ (2.29) 0.95∗∗∗ (2.69)
43

--- Page 45 ---

Table 5: Ex Ante Recursive Mean-Variance Efficient Portfolios
This table presents the maximum Sharpe Ratio of each factor model without (SR ) and with (SR )
w/o w
the volatility factor. Each portfolio of factors, within a given factor model, holds factors in proportion to
the optimal weights estimated using returns prior to portfolio formation in a recursive window. The data
starts in January 1972, but a minimum of 10 years of data is required to estimate initial weights. Thus, the
sampleperiodisJanuary1982toDecember2023. PanelsaredefinedasinTable3. %∆SRisthepercentage
improvement in SR of a factor model when adding the volatility factor. ωavg and ωavg are the average
VOL LV
weights of the volatility factor or its long leg in the ex post mean-variance portfolio of a factor model. The
column ’Avg.’ summarizes the average results across all factor models.
Panel A: Long-Short
FF5 FF5M FF5 FF5M HXZ BS DHS Avg.
c c
SR 0.73 0.82 0.92 0.97 0.90 0.90 1.19 0.92
w/o
SR 0.74 0.82 0.92 0.97 0.89 0.89 1.17 0.91
w
%∆SR 0.78 0.03 -0.53 -0.77 -0.89 -0.96 -1.46 -0.54
ωavg 7.55 7.94 4.37 5.55 6.35 0.01 2.28 4.86
VOL
Panel B: Long-Plus-Short
FF5 FF5M FF5 FF5M HXZ BS DHS Avg.
c c
SR 0.68 0.78 0.92 0.99 0.89 1.02 1.10 0.91
w/o
SR 0.85 0.95 1.02 1.10 1.02 1.10 1.15 1.03
w
%∆SR 24.24 21.82 11.08 11.65 14.65 7.30 4.88 13.66
ωavg 14.61 20.15 12.03 18.74 23.25 5.17 11.43 15.06
LV
Panel C: Net Long-Plus-Short
FF5 FF5M FF5 FF5M HXZ BS DHS Avg.
c c
SR 0.54 0.50 0.59 0.58 0.55 0.54 0.54 0.55
w/o
SR 0.69 0.70 0.69 0.70 0.70 0.65 0.62 0.68
w
%∆SR 27.56 40.80 15.58 22.56 27.32 21.22 14.33 24.20
ωavg 24.42 22.68 15.05 16.64 30.04 10.77 27.32 20.99
LV
Panel D: Net Long-Market
FF5 FF5M FF5 FF5M HXZ BS DHS Avg.
c c
SR 0.54 0.53 0.57 0.57 0.43 0.58 0.53 0.54
w/o
SR 0.68 0.70 0.67 0.70 0.76 0.69 0.64 0.69
w
%∆SR 27.01 30.25 16.58 22.35 74.67 19.26 20.92 30.15
ωavg 26.36 23.72 16.67 17.85 35.69 13.98 48.37 26.09
LV
44

--- Page 46 ---

Table 6: Bootstrapped-based Model Comparison
This table reports the percentage of bootstrap simulations in which the model specified by the row header
hasthehighestSharperatioamongallmodelsintherun,or”winprobability”(”Win”),bothin-sample(IS)
as well as out-of-sample (OS). Simulations are based on 10.000 runs. The IS and OS simulations split the
624 sample months of our sample period, January 1972 through December 2023, into 312 adjacent pairs. A
simulationrundrawsarandomsamplewithreplacementof312pairs. IntheISsimulationrun,werandomly
pick a month from each pair in the run. Subsequently, we calculate the IS mean-variance tangency portfolio
weightsandapplythoseweightsintheunusedmonthsofthesimulationpairstocomputethecorresponding
OS estimate of the Sharpe Ratio for the IS tangency portfolio. Panel A considers factor models without the
volatility (VOL) factor, while Panel B adds the volatility factor to the opportunity set. The final row of
Panel B (Pr(VOL)) presents the sum by column of the win probabilities across the models including the
volatility factor.
Long-Short Long-Plus-Short Net Long-Plus-Short Net Long-Market
Win Win Win Win Win Win Win Win
IS OS IS OS IS OS IS OS
Panel A: Factor Models Excluding VOL
FF5 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
FF5M 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
FF5 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
c
FF5M 0.00 0.12 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.02
c
HXZ 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
BS 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.02
DHS 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.11 0.00 0.02
Panel B: Factor Models Including VOL
FF5+V 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
FF5M+V 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.15 0.01
FF5 +V 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01
c
FF5M +V 0.01 0.05 0.03 0.01 0.08 0.26 0.11 0.28
c
HXZ+V 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.31 0.00 0.24
BS+V 0.46 0.65 0.80 0.97 0.42 0.05 0.47 0.14
DHS+V 0.53 0.01 0.17 0.01 0.19 0.04 0.08 0.11
Pr(VOL) 1.00 0.74 1.00 0.99 0.79 0.67 0.81 0.79
45

--- Page 47 ---

Table 7: Model Comparison using Extended Sample Periods
This table reports the maximum Sharpe ratio obtained by the row model excluding (SR ) and including
w/o
(SR ) the volatility factor. %∆SR shows the percentual change in max. Sharpe ratios. ω (ω ) is the
w VOL LV
weight of the (low) volatility factor in the ex post mean-variance portfolio of a factor model. α reports the
intercepts (annualized) obtained from regressing the ex post mean-variance efficient factor model including
the volatility factor against the efficient factor model portfolio without the volatility factor. The t-statistics
(t(α)) are Newey-West adjusted with 6 lags, and are reported in the last column of each Panel. Asterisks
indicate its significance at the 10% (*), 5% (**) or 1% (***) level. The sample period spans January 1930
till December 2023 for all factor models, except for the five-factor models, which start in July 1963 due to
data availability.
Panel A: Long-Short
SR SR %∆SR ω α t(α)
w/o w VOL
CAPM 0.44 0.59 33.92 54.44 2.79∗∗∗ 3.86
FF3 0.48 0.74 53.67 39.63 2.34∗∗∗ 5.48
FF5 0.85 0.87 2.23 9.45 0.14 1.35
FF5M 1.04 1.05 1.22 6.58 0.09 1.16
FF5 1.08 1.09 0.55 4.24 0.04 0.82
c
FF5M 1.22 1.22 0.39 3.43 0.03 0.75
c
Panel B: Net Long-Market
SR SR %∆SR ω α t(α)
w/o w LV
CAPM 0.44 0.69 58.18 83.45 2.01∗∗∗ 5.12
FF3 0.45 0.70 54.89 82.67 1.92∗∗∗ 5.15
FF5 0.61 0.77 24.57 49.80 0.90∗∗∗ 3.41
FF5M 0.70 0.87 23.80 34.32 0.68∗∗∗ 3.75
FF5 0.82 0.91 10.83 24.34 0.39∗∗∗ 2.77
c
FF5M 0.89 1.00 12.41 21.18 0.38∗∗∗ 3.21
c
46

--- Page 48 ---

Table 8: Other Low-Risk Measures
This table reports the intercepts (i.e., annualized alpha) obtained from regressing the ex post mean-variance efficient factor model including a low-
volatility factor, mentioned in each row and as defined in the text, against the efficient factor model portfolio without this factor. The t-statistics
(t(α)) are Newey-West adjusted with 6 lags, and are reported within parentheses. Asterisks indicate its significance at the 10% (*), 5% (**) or
1% (***) level. Panel A considers standard long-short factors (’Long-Short’). Panel B considers only the long legs of factors while accounting for
transaction costs (’Net Long-Market’). The sample period is January 1972 to December 2023.
Panel A: Long-Short Panel B: Net Long-Market
FF5 FF5M FF5 FF5M HXZ BS DHS FF5 FF5M FF5 FF5M HXZ BS DHS
c c c c
VOL 0.13 0.06 0.03 0.02 0.03 0.00 0.03 0.48∗∗∗ 0.42∗∗∗ 0.35∗∗ 0.35∗∗∗ 1.03∗∗∗ 0.35∗∗∗ 0.95∗∗∗
252d
(1.20) (0.89) (0.64) (0.46) (0.59) (0.19) (0.54) (2.73) (3.03) (2.54) (2.91) (3.99) (3.00) (2.69)
VOL 0.03 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.01 0.06 0.43∗∗∗ 0.41∗∗∗ 0.33∗∗ 0.35∗∗∗ 1.03∗∗∗ 0.35∗∗∗ 0.90∗∗∗
36M
(0.58) (0.58) (0.01) (0.10) (0.45) (0.34) (0.82) (2.66) (3.11) (2.53) (3.01) (4.06) (3.07) (2.66)
VOL 0.20∗ 0.08 0.04 0.01 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.61∗∗∗ 0.49∗∗∗ 0.39∗∗∗ 0.35∗∗∗ 0.71∗∗∗ 0.37∗∗∗ 0.71∗∗
Ind
(1.82) (1.20) (0.84) (0.49) (0.79) (0.05) (0.26) (3.35) (3.50) (2.99) (3.18) (3.84) (3.53) (2.48)
VOL 0.26 0.15 0.08 0.05 0.09 0.00 0.01 0.48∗∗∗ 0.41∗∗∗ 0.33∗∗ 0.32∗∗∗ 1.15∗∗∗ 0.32∗∗∗ 1.10∗∗∗
levered
(1.60) (1.30) (0.97) (0.82) (1.05) (0.08) (0.38) (2.59) (2.82) (2.35) (2.64) (3.81) (2.78) (2.58)
IVOL 0.12 0.05 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.03 0.56∗∗∗ 0.49∗∗∗ 0.41∗∗∗ 0.41∗∗∗ 1.12∗∗∗ 0.41∗∗∗ 1.10∗∗∗
(1.11) (0.79) (0.43) (0.25) (0.42) (0.34) (0.59) (3.04) (3.35) (2.83) (3.19) (4.27) (3.30) (3.12)
BAB 0.20 0.08 0.11 0.04 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.25∗ 0.21∗ 0.19∗ 0.17∗ 0.65∗∗∗ 0.16∗ 0.43∗
(1.51) (0.95) (1.22) (0.79) (0.93) (0.01) (0.12) (1.95) (1.95) (1.88) (1.92) (2.95) (1.94) (1.58)
DBAB 0.04 0.02 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.00 0.04 0.54∗∗∗ 0.48∗∗∗ 0.43∗∗∗ 0.43∗∗∗ 1.03∗∗∗ 0.40∗∗∗ 0.98∗∗∗
(0.67) (0.53) (0.59) (0.50) (0.43) (0.11) (0.74) (2.84) (3.10) (2.82) (3.08) (4.07) (3.11) (2.62)
DVOL 0.04 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.04 0.41∗∗ 0.39∗∗∗ 0.30∗∗ 0.33∗∗∗ 0.98∗∗∗ 0.32∗∗∗ 0.85∗∗
(0.68) (0.52) (0.10) (0.06) (0.14) (0.83) (0.63) (2.48) (2.92) (2.29) (2.78) (3.85) (2.81) (2.50)
47

--- Page 49 ---

Figure 2: Sharpe Ratio Distribution across Construction Specifications
ThisfigureshowsthedistributionofSharperatiosacross4,096factorconstructionspecifications. Weconsider
all factors except for the market and size factors, and show Sharpe ratios for the (hedged) long legs of each
factor after taking transaction costs into account. The sample period is January 1972 to December 2023.
48

--- Page 50 ---

Table 9: Accounting for Methodological Uncertainty
This table reports the presents the average maximum Sharpe Ratio of each factor model without (SR )
w/o
and with (SR ) the volatility factor across 4,096 factor construction specifications. Furthermore, we report
w
theaverageintercept(α)obtainedfromregressingtheexpostmean-varianceefficientfactormodelincluding
the volatility factor against the efficient factor model portfolio without the volatility factor, as well as the
proportion for which the statistical significance level exceeds a threshold of 5% (P(t ≥ 1.96)). Panel A
considers standard long-short factors (’Long-Short’). Panel B considers only the long legs of factors while
accountingfortransactioncosts(’NetLong-Market’). ThesampleperiodisJanuary1972toDecember2023.
Panel A: Long-Short Panel B: Net Long-Market
SR SR α P(t≥1.96) SR SR α P(t≥1.96)
w/o w w/o w
FF5 1.14 1.17 0.35 0.35 0.83 1.02 0.70 0.97
FF5 1.26 1.28 0.14 0.12 0.90 1.03 0.52 0.91
c
FF5M 1.47 1.48 0.07 0.03 1.10 1.26 0.55 0.98
FF5M 1.54 1.55 0.05 0.03 1.13 1.26 0.43 0.92
c
HXZ 1.34 1.35 0.09 0.05 0.99 1.14 0.54 0.92
BS 1.56 1.58 0.12 0.13 1.20 1.32 0.40 0.87
DHS 1.49 1.51 0.17 0.16 0.82 0.90 0.65 0.69
49

--- Page 51 ---

Appendices
A Factor Variable Definitions
Variable Description
Excess market return: The value-weighted portfolio return of all NYSE, Amex, and
Mkt-Rf Nasdaq common stocks with a CRSP share code of 10 or 11 minus the 1-month
Treasury bill rate.
Market Capitalization: prices (CRSP item PRC) times shares outstanding (CRSP
SMB
item SHROUT)
Book-to-Market: Book equity for June of year t is defined as the total assets for
the previous fiscal year-end in calendar year t − 1, minus liabilities, plus deferred
taxes and investment tax credit, minus preferred stock liquidating value if available
or redemption value if available, or carrying value. The carrying value is adjusted
HML
for net share issuance from the fiscal year-end to the end of December of t−1. The
book-to-market ratio divides the book equity by the market capitalization. For HML
we use book-to-market ratios from previous June. For HML we use the previous’
d
month book-to-market ratio.
Investments: Annual change in total assets (Compustat annual item AT) divided by
CMA
1-year-lagged total assets.
Accrual-based operating profitability: Operating profits is defined as revenues (Com-
pustatannualitemREVT)minuscostofgoodssold(CompustatannualitemCOGS)
RMW minusselling,general,andadministrativeexpensive(CompustatannualitemXSGA)
minus interest expense (Compustat annual XINT). We divide operating profits by
book equity for the last fiscal year ending in t−1.
Cash-basedoperatingprofitability: Theoperatingprofitabilityminusaccrualsforthe
fiscal year ending in t−1. Accruals are the change in accounts receivable from t−2
RMW to t−1, plus the change in prepaid expenses, minus the change in accounts payable,
c
inventory, deferred revenue, and accrued expenses (Ball, Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and
Nikolaev, 2016).
Momentum: At the beginning of each month t for each stock we calculate the prior
MOM
11-month returns from month t−12 to t−2, skipping month t−1.
Investments-to-assets: annual change in total assets (Compustat annual item AT)
IA
divided by 1-year-lagged total assets.
Return-on-Equity: Income before extraordinary items (Compustat quarterly item
ROE IBQ) divided by the one-quarter-lagged book equity. We use the quarterly version of
the book equity measure as proposed in Davis, Fama, and French (2000).
50

--- Page 52 ---

Variable Description
Consists of two sorting variables: Net and Composite Share Issuance. Net Share
Issuance of fiscal year t−1 equals the natural log of the ratio of split-adjusted shares
FIN outstandingoffiscalyeart1tosplit-adjustedsharesoutstandingoffiscalyeart2. The
split-adjustedsharesoutstandingisthecommonshareoutstanding(CSHO)timesthe
adjustment factor (AJEX).
4-day CAR around earnings announcement: The abnormal return is calculated as
the four-day cumulative abnormal returns from day t−2 and t+1 around the latest
quarterlyearningsannouncementdate(CompustatquarterlyitemRDQ).Theabnor-
mal normal is used in the months following the quarterly earnings date (RDQ), but
PEAD within six months from the fiscal quarter end, to exclude stale earnings. In addition,
werequire,theearningsannouncementdatetobeafterthecorrespondingfiscalquar-
ter end. We require valid daily returns on more than two of the trading days in this
window. Inaddition,weonlyuseearningsthatareannouncedtwotradingdaysprior
to the end of the month.
VOL Past 252-day rolling return volatility.
Past 252-day rolling idiosyncratic return volatility based on residuals obtained from
IVOL
regressing the excess return on the 3-factor model of Fama and French (1993).
Past252-dayrollingmarketbetaobtainedfromregressingtheexcessreturnofastock
BAB
on the excess market return factor of Fama and French (1993).
51